Release Notes — v1.0.0
======================

Highlights
----------

-  [core, architecture] Large refactor and modularization across animal,
   manure, crop/soil, feed, and I/O subsystems.
-  [animal] Major reorganization of the animal module (growth,
   digestion, milk/lactation, genetics, reproduction and ration
   management).
-  [manure] Comprehensive manure-module refresh (streams, processors,
   storages, separators, anaerobic digester fixes, temperature model).
-  [output] OutputManager and reporting rework: chunked outputs,
   data-origin tracking, improved rounding/significant-digits and CSV
   unit handling.
-  [testing] Expanded unit and end-to-end (E2E) test coverage and
   automated E2E expected-results regeneration.
-  [tooling] Packaging and CI updates (pyproject.toml, GitHub Actions);
   baseline Python compatibility changed in CI tooling.
-  Note: Many renames and refactors were introduced (examples include
   output keys and time/unit names). These changes may be
   backward-incompatible for scripts and downstream reports.

Scientific Evaluation
---------------------

Evaluation Objective:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A structured whole-farm evaluation was conducted prior to release of
v1.0 to assess integrated model performance following recent updates.
While individual methods are tested throughout development, this
whole-farm assessment focused on system-wide behavior across diverse
farm conditions.

Key Findings:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  **Alignment with reported production:** Predicted annual milk
   production closely matched farm-reported values across the 13
   evaluation farms
-  **Environmental outcomes within expected ranges:** Enteric methane,
   manure emissions, and carbon intensity estimates were within expected ranges
   and behaved consistently in response to production efficiency and manure system
   configuration.
-  **Methodological updates performed as intended:** Differences between
   v0.8 and v1.0 were consistent with documented updates to herd
   demographics simulation, lactation curve implementation, diet
   formulation, and manure module methodology. Observed shifts were
   directionally logical and explainable.
-  **No evidence of unintended system instability:** Production and
   emissions outputs remained coherent across diverse farm scenarios.

Methodology:
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Thirteen farms representing variation in herd size, geography,
production level, and management practices were simulated four times
each, with outputs averaged to reduce stochastic variability. We
evaluated production metrics (e.g., milk yield, intake, herd
demographics) and environmental outcomes (e.g. enteric methane, manure
methane and N₂O, and carbon intensity).

Model performance was assessed through:

-  Comparison of predicted milk production with farm-reported values,
-  Benchmarking environmental outputs against published literature
   ranges, and
-  Comparison with v0.8 model outputs to ensure changes aligned with
   documented methodological updates.

This review was designed to confirm biologically and environmentally
plausible system-level behavior prior to release. While not a formal
external validation, the results provide confidence that the v1.0 update
performs as intended across a diverse set of farm scenarios. For a more detailed
report of the methods, results, and key findings, please see the full report which is `linked here. <https://github.com/RuminantFarmSystems/RuFaS/blob/main/docs/_src/_wiki/_release_notes/RuFaSV1_Eval_article.pdf>`__

Improvements
------------

-  [animal] Reorganized animal/herd initialization; ration formulation
   and ration-optimizer refactored to enable user-defined rations.
-  [animal] Nutrition and requirements refactors; improved unit-test
   coverage for animal components.
-  [manure] New/updated manure storage classes (composting, slurry,
   covered/bedded-pack) and improved processor models
   (temperature-dependent processes, damping/Arrhenius adjustments).
-  [manure] Manure manager adjacency matrix validation and traversal
   improvements to clarify routing and processor order.
-  [feed] FeedManager and FeedStorage fixes: storage-based deductions,
   mapping/uniqueness handling, inventory rounding and buffer/shrink
   handling.
-  [emissions] Updates to feed and emissions handling including
   purchased-feed emissions, farmgrown feed LCA/LUC-related handling,
   and interpolated feed-emissions data support.
-  [output] ReportGenerator/GraphGenerator improvements: legend
   alignment, mapping logs, aggregation logging, and more consistent
   reporting of units.
-  [input, validation] InputManager and DataValidator consolidation:
   improved cross-validation, alias handling, more helpful error
   messages, and lazy runtime metadata loading.
-  [crop/soil] Crop and soil refactors including canopy water and
   root-depth handling; harvested crop dry-matter (DM) refactor.
-  [io] UTF‑8 CSV handling and CSV units improvements.
-  [performance] Performance optimizations (new numba usage in parts of
   the codebase).
-  [docs] Documentation improvements and Data Collection App (DCA)
   integration: schema, dropdowns and improved validation messages.

Bug Fixes
---------

-  [time/units] Fixed time-unit handling (unit renames and Time.day
   corrections).
-  [manure] Fixes to anaerobic digester behavior and separator handling
   that addressed processing and emissions flows.
-  [animal] Fixes to herd/reproduction handling (estrus, herd
   initialization) and enteric methane reporting adjustments.
-  [feed] Resolved feed-storage deduction and feed-purchase accounting
   defects; fixes that prevented potential infinite-loop conditions in
   ration/feeding logic.
-  [io] OutputManager parsing and report naming fixes to reduce
   ambiguity in aggregation and export.
-  [tests] Multiple E2E and unit-test fixes aligned with refactors to
   restore expected behaviour in automated tests.

Data / I/O Changes
------------------

-  [output] OutputManager now supports chunked output writing and
   enhanced data-origin metadata for reported variables.
-  [output] Standardized rounding and significant-digit behavior for
   reported values; CSV outputs now include unit information where
   available.
-  [input, dca] Data Collection App schema changes and new validation
   fields; improved error messaging and dropdown behavior.
-  [input] Support for multiple properties files and input_root
   handling; metadata loading moved to lazy/runtime where applicable.
-  [e2e] E2E expected-results regeneration was automated; tolerances and
   overwrite behaviour were adjusted in test automation.
-  Caution: renaming of output keys (examples noted during refactor) and
   changes to units/rounding can affect downstream dashboards, filters
   and comparisons.

Internal / Tooling
------------------

-  [ci] CI and packaging updates: pyproject.toml and GitHub Actions
   workflow updates; CI now targets newer Python runtime(s) in
   workflows.
-  [deps] Added/used numba in parts of the codebase for
   performance-critical paths.
-  [testing] Increased unit-test coverage and improved E2E automation,
   including test fixes and fork/CI reliability improvements.
-  [docs] Sphinx documentation updates and repo governance additions
   (LICENSE, CODEOWNERS, CONTRIBUTING).
-  [constants] Consolidation of constants and units across modules to
   reduce duplication.

Known Risks and Notes
---------------------

-  Large refactors and many moved/renamed symbols may cause
   backward-incompatible API changes; downstream tools and reports may
   require updates.
-  New dependency (numba) and CI/tooling changes may require environment
   adjustments for users and CI runners.
-  Changes to emissions defaults, interpolated feed-emissions data, and
   rounding/units may materially change model outputs relative to
   previous releases; subject-matter review is advised.
-  OutputManager chunkification and altered reporting/origins increase
   complexity for downstream consumers; verify memory/IO behavior for
   large runs.
-  DataValidator now consolidates validation behavior; callers that
   previously relied on OutputManager side effects should confirm new
   control flow and event logging.
